README.md, before:

# Dot Steward Monorepo

Dot Steward is a typed toolkit for describing machine setup and dotfile management. It provides a plugin-based API built with Zod so you can declaratively describe packages, files, and shell configuration that make up your environment.

This repository is organized as a Bun/Turborepo monorepo and publishes packages under the `@dot-steward/` scope.

## Packages

- `packages/` – shared libraries and the high level `dot-steward` package.
  - `@dot-steward/core` – shared types and the base `Plugin` class.
  - `dot-steward` – entry point that re-exports all plugin helpers.
- `plugins/` – modular plugins that contribute item types:
  - `@dot-steward/apt` – APT packages for Debian/Ubuntu systems.
  - `@dot-steward/brew` – Homebrew taps, formulas, and casks.
  - `@dot-steward/command` – run arbitrary shell commands.
  - `@dot-steward/file` – ensure files, directories, or symlinks exist.
  - `@dot-steward/shell` – manage env variables, aliases, and PATH entries.

## Usage

```ts
import { plan, profile, apt, brew, command, file, shell } from "dot-steward";

const workstation = profile("workstation", {
  match: { os: "linux" },
  items: [
    command.cmd("git", "git --version", "sudo apt install git"),
    apt.pkg("curl"),
    brew.formula("node"),
    file.ensure("vimrc", "~/.vimrc", "set number"),
    shell.alias("list", "ll", "ls -la"),
  ],
});

const setup = plan({ profiles: [workstation] });
```

Plans group profiles with match conditions and a list of items from the plugin ecosystem.

## Scripts

- `bun run build` – run build across workspaces.
- `bun run dev` – start development servers.
- `bun run lint` – lint with Biome.
- `bun run lint:fix` – automatically fix lint issues.
- `bun run format` – format code with Biome.
- `bun run test` – run tests for all packages.

## Getting Started

Install dependencies using [Bun](https://bun.sh):

```sh
bun install
```

Commands use Bun's `bun run` and Turborepo to execute across packages.

## License

This project is licensed under the [MIT License](LICENSE).

Commit message:

feat(cli): add CLI package and remove dot-steward (#17)

README.md, after:

# Dot Steward Monorepo

Dot Steward is a typed toolkit for describing machine setup and dotfile management. It provides a plugin-based API built with Zod so you can declaratively describe packages, files, and shell configuration that make up your environment.

This repository is organized as a Bun/Turborepo monorepo and publishes packages under the `@dot-steward/` scope.

## Packages

- `packages/` – shared libraries and the CLI.
  - `@dot-steward/core` – shared types and the base `Plugin` class.
  - `@dot-steward/cli` – command-line interface.
- `plugins/` – modular plugins that contribute item types:
  - `@dot-steward/apt` – APT packages for Debian/Ubuntu systems.
  - `@dot-steward/brew` – Homebrew taps, formulas, and casks.
  - `@dot-steward/command` – run arbitrary shell commands.
  - `@dot-steward/file` – ensure files, directories, or symlinks exist.
  - `@dot-steward/shell` – manage env variables, aliases, and PATH entries.

## Usage

Run the CLI with Bun:

```sh
bunx @dot-steward/cli
```

Plans group profiles with match conditions and a list of items from the plugin ecosystem.

## Scripts

- `bun run build` – run build across workspaces.
- `bun run dev` – start development servers.
- `bun run lint` – lint with Biome.
- `bun run lint:fix` – automatically fix lint issues.
- `bun run format` – format code with Biome.
- `bun run test` – run tests for all packages.

## Getting Started

Install dependencies using [Bun](https://bun.sh):

```sh
bun install
```

Commands use Bun's `bun run` and Turborepo to execute across packages.

## License

This project is licensed under the [MIT License](LICENSE).
